28 January 2005



To all,

I have added a few things and fixed some bugs in QTL Cartographer. 

First, the bugs:

1.  Eqtl was missing QTL at the ends of chromosomes.  

2.  Emap was printing the wrong values for markers in its final
    translation of the data file.   

3.  MImapqtl was outputting residuals to an incorrect location if
    you were setting a working directory.

4.  JZmapqtl output dominance values for MultiRegress (Model 9) 
    incorrectly.
    
5.  Prune, when doing selective genotyping, was not using the 
    requested level of selection.
    
6.  Zmapqtl estimated r2 and tr2 with a sampling variance rather
    than the biased estimate  used in maximum likelihood.
    The r2 values were off by a factor of (n-1)/n.  

All of the above were fixed.


Now, some new features:

1.  JZmapqtl can now do a pleiotropy test.  I am currently working on
    a pleiotropy x close linkage test.

2.  Prune can collapse a map and data set to eliminate marker intervals
    of 0.0.  This is useful if you have a lot of markers.  Closely linked 
    markers may then have identical information over individuals.  These can
    be combined.  

3.  Modified Permute.pl to calculate  experimentwise thresholds for
    GxE LR scores when using hypothesis test 14 or 34.

4.  Modified Emap so that you can reestimate the intermarker distances without
    rearranging markers.    

5.  Changed Prune so that the last random number will be printed as the
    seed in the qtlcart.rc file when doing bootstraps, permutations and
    simulations.   This will cause the programs to switch to reading and
    writing the random number.   This was done so that scripts that did 
    bootstraps would not reuse the same random number seed in consecutive
    iterations, which begins to occur with very fast computers.
 
6.  Introduced FPN variable so that programs can use
    double or float universally (-DFPN=double, -DFPN=float) when compiling 
    UNIX versions.

7.  Was able to compile 64 bit binaries under Solaris and
    someone did same for Unix Tru64 v5.1.   See the Makefile
    for the different compiler flags needed.  

8.  Qstats can now produce a table of the marker probability distribution.  For 
    missing or dominant markers, the probabilities of AA, Aa and aa marker
    states are calculated via Jiang and Zeng's 1997 paper.  

9.  The Unix version will compile a Bmapqtl (Bayesian interval mapping) module,
    but this is not ready for use.   


Chris
