NAME
    Dobasics.pl - Do a basic set of analyses for a QTL mapping data set

SYNOPSIS
      Dobasics.pl  [-b bindir] [-X stem] [-S sig. threshold] [-m mapinput] 
        [-d datainput]  [-t trait] [-H hypothesis] [-V] [-h]   

DESCRIPTION
    Dobasics.pl does a basic analysis of a QTL mapping data set. Map and
    data files are translated first. Then, basic single marker analyses are
    followed by interval mapping and composite interval mapping. Eqtl
    produces a summary of results and Preplot prepares the results for
    plotting with Gnuplot.

OPTIONS
    -b  This option requires the path to the QTL Cartographer binaries and
        perl scripts.

    -t  requires an integer telling which trait to analyze. If you want to
        do them all, set this to one more than the number of traits.

    -X  This option allows you to specify the filename stem.

    -S  This option requires a real number to indicate the significance
        threshold for the likelihood ratio.

    -m  This allows you to specify an input file for the map data. It should
        be in the format of map.inp or MAPMAKER/EXP output. If not used, the
        script assumes that the map file already exists in the correct
        format.

    -d  This allows you to specify an input file for the mapping data. It
        should be in the format of cross.inp or MAPMAKER/EXP raw format. If
        not used, the script assumes that the date file already exists in
        the correct format.

    -H  Use this option to specify which hypothesis test you want to use.
        The usual values are 10 or 30.

    -V  requires no operand. If used, it turns off messages indicating the
        progress of the script.

    -h  requires no operand. If used, it prints a usage message and exits.

ANALYSES
    Assume that we will use the filename stem *qtlcart* for the following.
    The script does the tasks in this order:

    Rmap
        Convert the map found in the file specified by the -m option into
        QTL Cartographer format with Rmap. If the option is not used, then
        the script assumes that the map is already in the correct format and
        resides in the file qtlcart.map.

    Rcross
        Convert the data found in the file specified by the -d option into
        QTL Cartographer format with Rcross. If the option is not used, then
        the script assumes that the data is already in the correct format
        and resides in the file qtlcart.cro.

    Qstats
        Run Qstats to generate basic statistics.

    LRmapqtl
        Do simple linear regression with LRmapqtl.

    SRmapqtl
        Do stepwise linear regression with SRmapqtl.

    Zmapqtl
        Do composite interval mapping with Zmapqtl and the model specified
        on the command line. The default is to use model 6.

    JZmapqtl
        Do multiple trait composite interval mapping with JZmapqtl. This
        will only be done if you speciefied more than one trait with the -t
        option.

    Eqtl
        Estimate QTL positions from the analyses above.

    Preplot
        Prepare the results for display with GNUPLOT. You will need to run
        GNUPLOT on your own.

    JZmapqtl
        This step converts the data into a format that can be analyzed by
        MultiRegress.

    MultiRegress
        Use least-squares analysis to estimate QTL postions.

    Rqtl
        Convert the output of MultiRegress into a format that can be read as
        an initial model for multiple interval mapping.

    MImapqtl
        Use the reformatted results from MultiRegress to estimate new QTL
        and epistatic effects.

EXAMPLE
    Suppose the files mletest.map and mletest.cro are in the current working
    directory.

        % Dobasics.pl  -b /home/basten/bin  -X mletest -S 13.0  -H 10  

    Will assume that the QTL Cartographer programs are in /home/basten/bin.
    It will use a significance threshold of 13.0. It will do basic
    statistics, single marker analyses, interval and composite interval
    mapping, and prepare the data for Gnuplot.

    Suppose the files realdatm.inp and realdatc.inp are in the current
    working directory. These files are formatted like map.inp and cross.inp
    and need to be translated. Use

            % Dobasics.pl -b /home/basten/bin  -X realdat -m realdatm.inp -d realdatc.inp  -S 13.0  -H 30

    for this analysis.

SEE ALSO
    Zmapqtl(1), Qstats(1), Eqtl(1), LRmapqtl(1), SRmapqtl(1), Rmap(1),
    Rcross(1), Rqtl(1), MultiRegress(1), MImapqtl(1), Preplot(1)

AUTHORS
    In general, it is best to contact us via email
    (basten@statgen.ncsu.edu).

            Christopher J. Basten, B. S. Weir and Z.-B. Zeng
            Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University
            Raleigh, NC 27695-7566, USA
            Phone: (919)515-1934

