NAME
    LRmapqtl - Single marker QTL analysis.

SYNOPSIS
    LRmapqtl [ -o *output* ] [ -i *input* ] [ -m *mapfile* ] [ -r *reps* ] [
    -t *trait* ]

DESCRIPTION
    LRmapqtl uses simple linear regression to map quantitative trait loci to
    a map of molecular markers. It requires a molecular map that could be a
    random one produced by Rmap, or a real one in the same format as the
    output of Rmap. The sample could be a randomly generated one from Rcross
    or a real one in the same format as the output of Rcross.

OPTIONS
    See QTLcart(1) for more information on the global options -h for help,
    -A for automatic, -V for non-Verbose -W path for a working directory, -R
    file to specify a resource file, -e to specify the log file, -s to
    specify a seed for the random number generator and -X stem to specify a
    filename stem. The options below are specific to this program.

    If you use this program without specifying any options, then you will
    get into a menu that allows you to set them interactively.

    -o  This requires a filename for output. LRmapqtl will append the file
        if it exists, and create a new file if it does not. If not used,
        then LRmapqtl will use qtlcart.lr.

    -i  This requires an input filename. This file must exist. It should be
        in the same format as the output of Rcross. The default file is
        qtlcart.cro.

    -m  LRmapqtl requires a genetic linkage map. This option requires the
        name of a file containing the map. It should be in the same format
        that Rmap outputs. The default file is qtlcart.map.

    -r  LRmapqtl will do a permutation test *a la* Churchill and Doerge
        (1994). This option specifies the number of permutions to do. It is
        zero by default, which means no permuation test is done. If used,
        you must specify a positive integer. Usually, 1,000 is sufficient.

    -t  Use this to specify which trait LRmapqtl will analyze. If this
        number is greater than the number of traits, then all traits will be
        analyzed. The default is to analyze trait 1 only.

MODEL
    The basic linear model is

            Trait = Mean + Slope x Marker + Error

    The marker value will be in the range [-1, 1] inclusive. Two hypotheses
    are compared. The null hypothesis is that the Slope is zero. The
    alternate is that the Slope is non-zero. A p-value for the likelihood
    ratio of these to hypotheses is calculated for each marker-trait
    combination. LRmapqtl outputs a table with parameter estimates, F
    statistics, Likelihood ratios and p-values.

INPUT FORMAT
    The input format of the molecular map should be the same as that of the
    output format from the program Rmap. The input format of the individual
    data should be the same as the output format of the program Rcross.

EXAMPLES
            % LRmapqtl -i corn.cro -m corn.map 

    Calculates the regression coefficients for each marker on the dataset in
    corn.cro using the genetic linkage map in corn.map.

REFERENCES
    1.  Churchill, G. A. and R. W. Doerge (1994) Empirical threshold values
        for quantitative trait mapping. *Genetics* 138, 963-971.

BUGS
SEE ALSO
    Emap(1), Rmap(1), Rqtl(1), Rcross(1), Qstats(1), LRmapqtl(1),
    BTmapqtl(1), SRmapqtl(1), JZmapqtl(1), Eqtl(1), Prune(1), Preplot(1),
    MImapqtl(1), MultiRegress(1), Examples(1) SSupdate.pl(1), Prepraw.pl(1),
    EWThreshold.pl(1), GetMaxLR.pl(1), Permute.pl(1), Vert.pl(1),
    CWTupdate.pl(1), Ztrim.pl(1), SRcompare.pl(1), Ttransform.pl(1),
    TestExamples.pl(1), Model8.pl(1), Dobasics.pl(1), Bootstrap.pl(1)

CONTACT INFO
    In general, it is best to contact us via email
    (basten@statgen.ncsu.edu).

            Christopher J. Basten, B. S. Weir and Z.-B. Zeng
            Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University
            1523 Partners II Building/840 Main Campus Drive
            Raleigh, NC 27695-7566     USA
            Phone: (919)515-1934

    Please report all bugs via email to qtlcart-bug@statgen.ncsu.edu.

    The QTL Cartographer web site ( http://statgen.ncsu.edu/qtlcart ) has
    links to the manual, man pages, ftp server and supplemental materials.

