NAME
    RCpermute.pl - Compute statistics from a permutation test

SYNOPSIS
       RCpermute.pl [-R row file] [-R col file] [-h]   > output

DESCRIPTION
    RCpermute.pl reads the results from two special files produced by
    Permute.pl. These files contain the sum and sum of squares for the rows
    or the columns of the permutation analysis. We define rows as the
    permutation, and columns as the sites.

OPTIONS
    -C  This option requires an input filename that must exist. It allows
        the user to specify the column results file for processing. If it is
        not given, then the script will exit.

    -R  This option requires an input filename that must exist. It allows
        the user to specify the row results file for processing. If it is
        not given, then the script will exit.

    -h  requires no operand. If used, it prints a usage message and exits.

ANALYSIS
    Zmapqtl calculates likelihood ratios at numerous sites during each
    permutation. Think of a matrix of these likelihood ratios where columns
    are for sites in the genome and rows are for permutations. If you run
    Permute.pl with the -u flag, then the row and column sums will be stored
    in files. Sums of squares are also saved. The row results file will
    store a sum, sum of squares and sample size over the genome for each of
    the permutations. The column results file will store the sum, sum of
    squares and sample size over permutations for each test site. For the
    stem qtlcart, model *3* and *r* permutations, these results will be in
    qtlcart.z3.rss and qtlcart.z3.css.r, respectively.

EXAMPLE
    For a row results file qtlcart.z3.rss and a column results file
    qtlcart.z3.css.1000, use

        RCpermute.pl -R qtlcart.z3.rss -C qtlcart.z3.css.1000 > qtlcart.rcout

    to compute the row/column means and standard deviations.

SEE ALSO
    Zmapqtl(1), Prune(1), GetMaxLR.pl(1), Permute.pl(1)

AUTHORS
    In general, it is best to contact us via email
    (basten@statgen.ncsu.edu).

            Christopher J. Basten, B. S. Weir and Z.-B. Zeng
            Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University
            Raleigh, NC 27695-7566, USA
            Phone: (919)515-1934

