NAME
    Rmap - Simulate or reformat a map of molecular markers

SYNOPSIS
    Rmap [ -o *output* ] [ -i *input* ] [ -g *gmode* ] [ -f *mapfunc* ] [ -p
    *mapparam* ] [ -c *chroms* ] [ -m *MarkersPerChrom* ] [ -vm *sdMPC* ] [
    -d *InterMarkerDist* ] [ -vd *sdIMD* ] [ -t *Tails* ] [ -M *Mode* ]

DESCRIPTION
    Rmap creates a random map of molecular markers. The user specifies the
    number of chromosomes, the number of markers per chromosome and the
    average intermarker distance. If one specifies standard deviations for
    the number of markers and the average intermarker distances, they will
    vary subject to the normal distribution. The output gives a table of
    markers by chromosomes, with the distances between consecutive markers
    (in centiMorgans) in the table.

    If you specify an input file, Rmap will open it, determine if it is in
    the same format as Rmap outputs, and process it based in the value given
    to -g. If the input file is the output of MAPMAKER, then the map will be
    reformatted from MAPMAKER into the Rmap output format.

    Finally, there is a standard input format that Rmap can translate, and
    is defined in the file map.inp that comes with the distribution of the
    programs. Note that if the user specifies an input file, no simulations
    will be done and the latter half of the command line options are
    ignored.

OPTIONS
    See QTLcart(1) for more information on the global options -h for help,
    -A for automatic, -V for non-Verbose -W path for a working directory, -R
    file to specify a resource file, -e to specify the log file, -s to
    specify a seed for the random number generator and -X stem to specify a
    filename stem. The options below are specific to this program.

    If you use this program without specifying any options, then you will
    get into a menu that allows you to set them interactively.

    -o  This should be used with a filename indicating where the output will
        be written. Rmap will overwrite the file if it exists, and create a
        new file if it does not. If not used, then Rmap will use
        qtlcart.map.

    -i  You can use this option to specify an input filename. This file must
        exist and have one of three formats: Rmap.out, map.inp or
        mapmaker.mps. Rmap will attempt to identify the format of the file
        and translate it to another format. If you specify an input file,
        then the simulation parameters will be ignored.

    -g  Requires an integer to indicate the output format. You can use a 1
        for the default ouput format, a 2 for GNUPLOT output or a 3 for
        both. If you use a 2 or a 3, then you can use GNUPLOT to see
        graphical version of the linkage map.

    -f  Requires an integer option to specify the mapping function. Rmap can
        use the Haldane, Kosambi, fixed or a number of other functions. The
        default is to use the Haldane function, which is specified with a 1.
        Using a 2 invokes the Kosambi mapping function. A 3 means that a
        fixed function is used and thus the distance in Morgans is the
        recombination fraction. The type of mapping function used would then
        be recorded in the ouput and all following analyses will use this
        function. One must edit the map file to change this if not using
        Rmap.

    -p  Requires a real number. Some map functions need an extra parameter,
        and this allows the user to specify it. See the manual for details.

    -c  This allows you to specify the number of chromosomes if you are
        simulating a genetic linkage map. It is 4 by default. If you are
        translating a file, then this will be ignored as will the remaining
        options.

    -m  This allows you to specify the average number of markers per
        chromosome in a simulation. The default is 16.

    -vm This allows you to specify the standard deviation in the number of
        markers per chromosome. The number of markers per chromosome will
        have a normal distribution with mean given in the previous option,
        and the standard deviation specified here. If zero, then each
        chromosome will have the same number of markers.

    -d  Rmap uses the value given after this option as the average
        intermarker distance (in centiMorgans) for a simulation. It is 10
        centiMorgans by default.

    -vd The intermarker distance will have a normal distribution with mean
        set by the previous option and standard deviation specified with
        this option. It is 0.0 by default, which means that the intermarker
        distances between consecutive markers will all be the same. Set it
        to a positive value to have intermarker distances vary at random.

    -t  You can simulate maps where there are no markers on the telomeres
        with this option. Give this option a value of *tails* and Rmap puts
        an average of *tails* Morgans of genetic material on the ends of the
        chromosomes. By default, it is 0.0. If the standard deviation for
        intermarker distance is greater than 0.0, then then the amount of
        flanking DNA will have a normal distribution with mean given here
        and standard deviation proportional to that of the standard
        deviation of intermarker distances.

    -M  Allows you to specify an alternate simulation mode. If the -M option
        is used with a value of 1, then the intermarker distance will be
        used as the chromosome length (so you should make it longer), and
        the markers are placed on the chromosomes following the uniform
        distribution. The value of this option will be returned to 0 at the
        completion of the program.

INPUT FORMAT
    Rmap recognizes four types of files. The first is the Rmap.out format
    that Rmap itself creates. The second is a special format defined in the
    example file map.inp included in the distribution. The third format is
    the output of MAPMAKER. If the input file is a MAPMAKER output file,
    Rmap translates this file into its own format. If the input file is
    already in the correct format, Rmap will output it dependant upon the
    flag given to the -g option. The units of intermarker distances will be
    in centiMorgans in the output.

    Rmap also recognizes the input files for the Windows GUI version of QTL
    Cartographer (Wang, *et al.,* 2002).

EXAMPLES
            % Rmap -o Map.out -c 23 -vm 3 -vd 1 -t 5

    Simulates a random map where the number of markers on each of 23
    chromosomes has a normal distribution with mean 16 and standard
    deviation 3. The intermaker distance is normally distributed with mean
    10 cM and standard deviation 1. There will be some genetic material
    outside the flanking markers on each chromosome, with a mean length of 5
    cM and standard deviation 0.5.

            % Rmap -o Map.out -i map.mps  

    Opens the file map.mps, tries to determine its format, and translates it
    if possible. The output will be written to the file Map.out. The
    extension .mps should be used with MAPMAKER output files and the string
    *-filetype mapmaker.mps* should be put somewhere in the first twenty
    lines of the file.

            % Rmap -i map.inp -g 3 -X test

    This opens the file map.inp and translates it. Two output files are
    produced. The file test.map contains the genetic linkage map in Rmap.out
    format, while a file testmap.plt contains code for GNUPLOT. The next
    step would be to start GNUPLOT and load testmap.plt.

            % gnuplot
            gnuplot> load "testmap.plt"
            Hit return to continue
            gnuplot> quit

REFERENCES
    1.  Lander, E. S., P. Green, J. Abrahamson, A. Barlow, M. Daley, S.
        Lincoln and L. Newburg (1987) MAPMAKER: An interactive computer
        package for constructing primary genetic linkage maps of
        experimental and natural populations. *Genomics* 1, 174-181.

    2.  Wang, S., C. J. Basten and Z.-B. Zeng (2002) Windows QTL
        Cartographer: WinQtlCart V2.0.

    3.  T. Williams and C. Kelley (1993) GNUPLOT: An Interactive Plotting
        Program. Version 3.5

BUGS
    Note that if MAPMAKER outputs an intermarker distance of 0.00 cM, then
    Rmap will translate it to 0.0001 cM. In fact, all intermarker distances
    of 0.0 will be reset to 0.0001 cM.

    Prior to version 1.17d, if you tried to simulate more than 50 linkage
    groups, you would crash the other programs in the QTL Cartographer
    Suite. This bug was fixed with version 1.17d.

SEE ALSO
    Emap(1), Rmap(1), Rqtl(1), Rcross(1), Qstats(1), LRmapqtl(1),
    BTmapqtl(1), SRmapqtl(1), JZmapqtl(1), Eqtl(1), Prune(1), Preplot(1),
    MImapqtl(1), MultiRegress(1), Examples(1) SSupdate.pl(1), Prepraw.pl(1),
    EWThreshold.pl(1), GetMaxLR.pl(1), Permute.pl(1), Vert.pl(1),
    CWTupdate.pl(1), Ztrim.pl(1), SRcompare.pl(1), Ttransform.pl(1),
    TestExamples.pl(1), Model8.pl(1), Dobasics.pl(1), Bootstrap.pl(1)

CONTACT INFO
    In general, it is best to contact us via email
    (basten@statgen.ncsu.edu).

            Christopher J. Basten, B. S. Weir and Z.-B. Zeng
            Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University
            1523 Partners II Building/840 Main Campus Drive
            Raleigh, NC 27695-7566     USA
            Phone: (919)515-1934

    Please report all bugs via email to qtlcart-bug@statgen.ncsu.edu.

    The QTL Cartographer web site ( http://statgen.ncsu.edu/qtlcart ) has
    links to the manual, man pages, ftp server and supplemental materials.

