NAME
    SRcompare.pl - Compare a pair of SRmapqtl outut files to see how many
    cofactors were gained or lost

SYNOPSIS
      SRcompare.pl [-f SRmapqtl.old] [-h] < SRmapqtl.new > output

DESCRIPTION
    SRcompare.pl reads from the standard input and writes to the standard
    output. It is meant to compare the set of cofactors in two SRmapqtl
    output files. It will print out the number of cofactors that are the
    same, lost or gained in the two files.

OPTIONS
    -f  This option requires an input filename that must exist. It allows
        the user to specify the old SRmapqtl.out file for processing. If it
        is not given, then the script dies.

    -h  requires no operand. If used, it prints a usage message and exits.

INPUT FILES
    The input files should be of the same format as the output of SRmapqtl.
    You should have only one set of such results in a file to be processed
    by SRcompare.pl. These results are created by Eqtl as well as SRmapqtl.

OUTPUT
    At this time the output will be a single line telling how many cofactors
    were lost, gained or remained, between the two files. For example:

      10 are the same, 2 were lost and 0 were gained.

    Ideally, you would like to see 0 lost and 0 gained.

EXAMPLE
    Suppose we have a map in qtlcart.map and a data file in qtlcart.cro, and
    that there is no resource file in the current directory. For this
    example, assume that there are only two marker genotypes (that is a
    backcross or recombinant inbred line) and one trait. The following
    series of commands can be used to compare the cofactors chosen from
    interval mapping with those from composite interval mapping:

        % Qstats -X qtlcart
            % Zmapqtl -M 3 -A
            % Eqtl -S 12.0 -H 10 -I Z -A
            % mv qtlcart.z qtlcart.z.1
            % Zmapqtl -M 8 -A
            % mv qtlcart.eqt qtlcart.eqt.1
            % mv qtlcart.sr qtlcart.sr.1
            % Eqtl -S 12.0 -H 10 -I Z -A 
            % SRcompare.pl -f qtlcart.sr.1 < qtlcart.sr

    In the above, Qstats is run to set the filename stem. Next, Zmapqtl does
    an interval mapping analysis and Eqtl picks a set of markers closest to
    the peaks from interval mapping: These peaks are only used if they have
    likelihood ratios greater than 12.0. Next, the interval mapping results
    are moved to an new file and composite interval mapping is run using the
    cofactors identified via interval mapping. The previous output files of
    Eqtl (qtlcart.eqt and qtlcart.sr) are renamed and new files are
    generated from the composite interval mapping results. Then,
    SRcompare.pl is used to compare the two sets of results, those from
    interval mapping (qtlcart.sr.1) and those from composite interval
    mapping (qtlcart.sr).

    This type of analysis can be iterated until a stable set of cofactors
    are identified.

SEE ALSO
    Eqtl(1), Qstats(1), SRmapqtl(1), Zmapqtl(1)

AUTHORS
    In general, it is best to contact us via email
    (basten@statgen.ncsu.edu).

            Christopher J. Basten, B. S. Weir and Z.-B. Zeng
            Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University
            Raleigh, NC 27695-7566, USA
            Phone: (919)515-1934

