NAME
    SRmapqtl - Map quantitative traits on a molecular map.

SYNOPSIS
    SRmapqtl [ -o *output* ] [ -i *input* ] [ -m *mapfile* ] [ -t *trait* ]
    [ -M *Model* ] [ -F *pFin* ] [ -B *pFout* ] [ -u *MaxSteps* ]

DESCRIPTION
    SRmapqtl uses stepwise regression to map quantitative trait loci to a
    map of molecular markers. It requires a molecular map that could be a
    random one produced by Rmap, or a real one in the same format as the
    output of Rmap. The sample could be a randomly generated one from Rcross
    or a real one in the same format as the output of Rcross.

    This program should be run before .Zmapqtl if you want to use composite
    interval mapping. The results will be used to pick markers background
    control in composite interval mapping. The main result from using this
    program is to rank the markers in terms of their influence on the trait
    of interest.

OPTIONS
    See QTLcart(1) for more information on the global options -h for help,
    -A for automatic, -V for non-Verbose -W path for a working directory, -R
    file to specify a resource file, -e to specify the log file, -s to
    specify a seed for the random number generator and -X stem to specify a
    filename stem. The options below are specific to this program.

    If you use this program without specifying any options, then you will
    get into a menu that allows you to set them interactively.

    -o  This requires a filename for output. SRmapqtl will append the file
        if it exists, and create a new file if it does not. If not used,
        then SRmapqtl will use qtlcart.sr.

    -i  This requires an input filename. This file must exist. It should be
        in the same format as the output of Rcross. The default file is
        qtlcart.cro.

    -m  SRmapqtl requires a genetic linkage map. This option requires the
        name of a file containing the map. It should be in the same format
        that Rmap outputs. The default file is qtlcart.map.

    -t  Use this to specify which trait SRmapqtl will analyze. If this
        number is greater than the number of traits, then all traits will be
        analyzed. The default is to analyze trait 1 only.

    -M  This tells SRmapqtl what type of analysis to perform. Use a 0 for
        forward stepwise (FS) regression, a 1 for backward elimination (BE)
        and a 2 for forward regression with a backward elimination step at
        the end (FB). It is probably best to use Model 2 here.

    -F  Requires a real number in the range 0.0 to 1.0. This is a threshold
        p value for adding markers in model 2 during the forward stepwise
        regression step. The default is 0.05.

    -B  Requires a real number in the range 0.0 to 1.0. This is a threshold
        p value for deleting markers in model 2 during the backward
        elimination step. It should probably be the same as the previous
        option. The default is 0.05.

    -u  Requires an integer valued argument. This allows you to specify a
        hard limit to the number of steps in a forward regression analysis.
        It is valid for models 0 and 2. By default, it is 100.

INPUT FORMAT
    The input format of the molecular map should be the same as that of the
    output format from the program Rmap. The input format of the individual
    data should be the same as the output format of the program Rcross.

EXAMPLES
            % SRmapqtl -i corn.cro -m corn.map -M 2

    Does a forward stepwise regression with a backward elimination step for
    the dataset in corn.cro using the genetic linkage map in corn.map.

REFERENCES
BUGS
    Forward and backward regression should probably use the thresholds for
    adding and deleting markers from the model. When that feature is added,
    the -F and -B options will have more use.

SEE ALSO
    Emap(1), Rmap(1), Rqtl(1), Rcross(1), Qstats(1), LRmapqtl(1),
    BTmapqtl(1), SRmapqtl(1), JZmapqtl(1), Eqtl(1), Prune(1), Preplot(1),
    MImapqtl(1), MultiRegress(1), Examples(1) SSupdate.pl(1), Prepraw.pl(1),
    EWThreshold.pl(1), GetMaxLR.pl(1), Permute.pl(1), Vert.pl(1),
    CWTupdate.pl(1), Ztrim.pl(1), SRcompare.pl(1), Ttransform.pl(1),
    TestExamples.pl(1), Model8.pl(1), Dobasics.pl(1), Bootstrap.pl(1)

CONTACT INFO
    In general, it is best to contact us via email
    (basten@statgen.ncsu.edu).

            Christopher J. Basten, B. S. Weir and Z.-B. Zeng
            Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University
            1523 Partners II Building/840 Main Campus Drive
            Raleigh, NC 27695-7566     USA
            Phone: (919)515-1934

    Please report all bugs via email to qtlcart-bug@statgen.ncsu.edu.

    The QTL Cartographer web site ( http://statgen.ncsu.edu/qtlcart ) has
    links to the manual, man pages, ftp server and supplemental materials.

